---
layout: default
title: Lenovo T430s
nav_order: 1
permalink: /t430s-building/
parent: Step 1 - Building Heads
grand_parent: Installing and configuring
---

Lenovo T430s
====

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
<details open markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Table of contents
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta }
1. TOC
{:toc}
</details>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 -->

This guide only documents build options you might be interested in, which are:
If you are not interested in those options follow the [General Building](/general-building/) guide.

- Setting an arbitrary MAC address.
- Change some BIOS options (like swap the fn and ctrl-key)

# Preparation

Follow the [General Building](/general-building/) until you have installed all dependencies and cloned the tree. _Do not_ execute `make BOARD=t430s-maximized` yet!

# Edit build (optional)

## Change MAC of Ethernet NIC (via Hexeditor)


The ethernets NIC firmware is located at: `blobs/t430s/gbe.bin`

The MAC address appears twice in there at the offset: `0x0` and `0x1000` and is set to `00:de:ad:c0:ff:ee`.

Replace `00:de:ad:c0:ff:ee` with your MAC addresses at the two offsets.

## Change MAC (via coreboots bincfg)

**TODO**
<!-- clone https://github.com/coreboot/coreboot.git
cd build/coreboot/utils/bincfg/ && make
set mac in gbe-8...
bincfg gbe-8...spec gbe8...set gbe1
-->

## BIOS options

You can enable certain options like: swap the fn and ctrl key, enable sticky fn key etc.

```
cd ~/
git clone https://github.com/coreboot/coreboot.git
cd coreboot/src/mainboard/lenovo/t430s/
# Open the cmos.default file and enable or disable the options you like. Save the file and close it.
git diff cmos.default > ~/heads/patches/coreboot-4.13/0061-cmos-settings.patch
```

## Set different flash chip in flashrom arguments

**This step is only necessary if non of the detected chips matches MX25L12835F/MX25L12845E/MX25L12865E.**

- Open `heads/boards/t430s-maximized.config` with an editor.
- Search for `CONFIG_FLASHROM_OPTIONS=`
- Replace `-c MX25L12835F/MX25L12845E/MX25L12865E` with `-c <your chip name>`.

Run the build again and copy the new `coreboot.rom` to the USB dongle.

# Build Heads
```
make BOARD=t430s-maximized
```

Wait. Building will take some time...

The `coreboot.rom` image will be copied to `build/coreboot-4.13/t430s-maximized/coreboot.rom`.
Copy it to a USB dongle and follow the [Flashing Guide](/t430s-flashing/).
