---
layout: default
title: Lenovo X230 Legacy
permalink: /x230-building/
nav_order: 1
parent: Step 1 - Building Heads
grand_parent: Installing and configuring
---

Lenovo X230 (Legacy)
====

For the Thinkpad x230 Legacy there are two boards "flavors "in `./boards`
 - x230-flash
 - x230, x230-hotp-verification

x230-flash is externally flashable into the top SPI flash chip and contains 
 a smaller package footprint, basically flashrom and dependencies, that will 
 let us boot to the Heads recovery shell. x230 is only internally flashable 
 and contains Heads, with a reduced feature set as compared to the maximized
 flavor.

Since you are planning to externally flash, you should probably go with the
 maximized flavor now. Maximized boards produce externally flashable top 
 and bottom rom images, a neutered ME image and a corresponding Intel Flash 
 Descriptor (IFD), giving Heads its maximized BIOS size footprint of 11.5Mb
 available space, as compared to 7Mb in Legacy board flavors.

x230-flash can also be flashed internally through 1vyrain, where 1vyrain cannot
 unlock neither ME or IFD flash regions. By using 1vyrain, you choose to lock
 yourself to Legacy boards flavor. 1vyrain will not neuter ME. You should
 consider flashing externally Maximized Heads version instead.

Since we will end up using both x230-flash and our chosen x230 flavor, it makes 
 the most sense to build both now. Where one last time, you should probably
 go withthe maximized builds if you have an external reprogrammer.

Initial SPI2 (4MB) flash chip
-----

x230 boards needs their 4MB SPI2 to be initially externally flashed,
 while the 12MB rom needs to be flashed internally from within Heads to make
 sure to not screw up with ME, contained in the SPI1 flash (8MB bottom flash
 chip under keyboard)

The following make command generates a self-contained, externally flashable rom
 for the SPI2 (4MB BIOS, top SPI flash under keyboard).

```Makefile
make BOARD=x230-flash
```

Resulting rom is found under build/x86/x230-flash/x230-flash.rom

Subsequent flashing (upgrades)
-----

The following make command will generate a 12MB `coreboot.rom` under the
 build/x86/x230 directory, which only contains a valid BIOS region (faked IFD,
 no ME, no GBE etc) which if flashed over a Maximized board flavor internally
 will result in a brick, and will require an external reprogrammer to flash
 the Maximized board roms to fix the problem.

Only Maximized builds are fully externally flashable ROMs.

```Makefile
make BOARD=x230
```

The `coreboot.rom` is the one needed to flash rom updates from within Heads in
respect of ME. This is done with the help of the `flashrom-x230.sh` script from
Heads recovery shell.

Please continue to the [flashing guide](/x230-flashing/)

More options and detail about Heads modules under [Makefile](/Makefile/)
