---
layout: default
title: Lenovo X230
permalink: /x230-flashing/
parent: Flashing Guides
grand_parent: Installing and configuring
---

Lenovo X230
===

First remove the battery or cable powering your device. The Thinkpad x230 has
 two SPI flash chips that hold the BIOS, ME, etc. and are located under the
 palm rest. To access these chips, first remove the indicated screws on the back
 of the laptop.

Removing these screws will allow you to remove the keyboard and palm rest.

The keyboard is connected to the motherboard by a ribbon cable which easily
 detaches from the motherboard. (The keyboard only needs to be removed so that
 the palm rest can be removed. After removing the palm rest, you can put the
 keyboard back.)

The palm rest is also connected to the motherboard, but there is a little latch
 holding its ribbon cable. After undoing that latch, the palm rest should be
fairly easy to remove.

Pull up the black plastic on the bottom right of the palm rest to reveal the two
 SPI flash chips.

The top chip is 4MB and contains the BIOS and reset vector. The bottom chip is
 8MB and has the [Intel Management Engine (ME)](https://www.flashrom.org/ME)
  firmware, plus the flash descriptor.

Try to read the name on the top SPI flash chip. Then, connect the clip and
 ch341a programmer to the top SPI flash chip. Use flashrom to check the chip
  that you are connected to:

```shell
sudo flashrom -p ch341a_spi
```

Find the chip and read from it twice (For me the SPI flash chip is `YYY`):

```shell
sudo flashrom -r ~/top.bin --programmer ch341a_spi -c YYY && \
    sudo flashrom -v ~/top.bin --programmer ch341a_spi -c YYY
```

If the files differ then try reconnecting your programmer to the SPI flash chip
 and make sure your flashrom software is up to date.

If they are the same then write `x230-flash.rom` to the SPI flash chip:

```shell
sudo flashrom -p ch341a_spi -c “YYY” -w ~/heads/build/x230-flash/x230-flash.rom
```

Try to read the name on the bottom SPI flash chip. Then, connect the clip and
 ch341a programmer to the bottom SPI flash chip. Use flashrom to check the chip
  that you are connected to:

```shell
sudo flashrom -p ch341a_spi
```

Find the chip and read from the chip twice (For me the SPI flash chip is `ZZZ`):

```shell
sudo flashrom -r ~/bottom.bin --programmer ch341a_spi -c ZZZ && \
    sudo flashrom -v ~/bottom.bin --programmer ch341a_spi -c ZZZ
```
